= Data Plane Design

The dataplane-operator provisions and configures nodes that make up the
OpenStack data plane. The data plane consists of nodes that host end-user
workloads and applications. Depending on the OpenStack deployment, these data
plane nodes are often compute nodes, but may also be storage nodes, networker
nodes, or other types of nodes.

The dataplane-operator provides a Kubernetes like abstraction and API for
deploying the data plane. It uses the
https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/openstack-baremetal-operator[openstack-baremetal-operator]
to optionally provision baremetal. It then uses the
https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/openstack-ansibleee-operator[openstack-ansibleee-operator]
to execute Ansible to deploy, configure, and orchestrate software on the nodes.
The software is typically RPM or container based using the `podman` container
runtime.

External Data Plane Management (EDPM) is the concept of using Ansible in this
manner to configure software on data plane nodes. Ansible is used instead of
using native Kubernetes Workload API's (Deployment, Job, Pod, etc) and kubelet.
While the Ansible executions themselves run on the Kubernetes cluster as native
Kubernetes workloads, they communicate using SSH with data plane nodes and use
various Ansible modules to deploy software on data plane nodes.

== dataplane-operator CRD Design and Resources

The dataplane-operator exposes the concepts of `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSets`,
`OpenStackDataPlaneServices`, and `OpenStackDataPlaneDeployments` as CRD's:

* <<openstackdataplanenodeset>>
* <<openstackdataplaneservice>>
* <<openstackdataplanedeployment>>

The `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet` CRD is used to describe a logical grouping of
nodes of a similar type. A node can only be defined in one NodeSet. This is
analogous to the concept of "roles" in TripleO. An OpenStack data plane is
likely to consist of multiple `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet` resources to describe
groups of nodes that are configured differently.

Similarities within a `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet` are defined by the user, and
could be of a small scope (ansible port), or a large scope (same network
config, nova config, provisioning config, etc). The properties that all nodes
in a `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet` share are set in the `nodeTemplate` field of
the `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet` spec. Node specific parameters are then defined
under the `nodeTemplate.nodes` section specific to that node. Options defined
here will override the inherited values from the `NodeSet`.

Divding and assigning nodes to different `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSets` is a
design decision by the user. Nodes that are configured mostly the same, are of
the same hardware, and serving the same purpose are likely candidates for being
in the same `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet`. While hardware differences or
differences in purposes (compute vs. netwoker) would lend themselves to nodes
being in different `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSets`.

`OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet` implements a baremetal provisioning interface to
provision the nodes if requested. The `baremetalSetTemplate` field is used to
describe the baremetal configuration of the nodes and is used to provision the
initial OS on the set of nodes.

The `OpenStackDataPlaneService` CRD for is an abstraction which combines
Ansible content and configuration from Kubernetes ConfigMaps and Secrets. The
Ansible content is typically a playbook from
https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/edpm-ansible[edpm-ansible], but can
be any Ansible play content. The ConfigMaps and Secrets are typically generated
from OpenStack control plane operators, but could be any configuration data
that needs to be consumed by the Ansible content.

An `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet` has a list of services that contain the
`OpenStackDataPlaneService` resources for the nodes in that
`OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet`. Using the services list, users can customize the
software that is deployed on the `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet` nodes.

The `OpenStackDataPlaneDeployment` CRD is used to start an Ansible execution
for the list of `OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSets` on the
`OpenStackDataPlaneDeployment`. Each `OpenStackDataPlaneDeployment` models a
single Ansible execution, and once the execution is successful, the
`OpenStackDataPlaneDeployment` does not automatically execute Ansible again,
even if the `OpenStackDataPlaneDeployment` or related
`OpenStackDataPlaneNodeSet` resources are changed. In order to start another
Ansible execution, another `OpenStackDataPlaneDeployment` resource needs to be
created. In this manner, the user maintains explicit control over when Ansible
actually executes through the creation of `OpenStackDataPlaneDeployment`
resources.
